---
title: Information intoxication
date: 2018-10-18
published: true
---

I still remember the last time I got hopelessly inebriated. It wasn't as long
ago as I'd like to admit. But it was a turning point for me, a wake-up call to
a grown man who shouldn't be letting that happen. The details of the story
aren't really important, except for one: it started with the all-too-familiar
mistake of drinking without having eaten dinner.

Anyone who's made this mistake understands the ramifications. When your stomach
is empty, a little bit of alcohol has much more of an impact than after you've
had a full meal[^full-meal]. As a result it's very easy to get drunk without
meaning to when you haven't eaten recently.

The relationship between food and alcohol in the context I'm describing is one
of proportionality. Ideally a small amount of alcohol is preceded by a
much larger amount of food. The alcohol provides a pleasant buzz, while the
food acts as a buffer, protecting against some of the negative effects of the
alcohol.

I have noticed that a similar relationship exists between what I'll call
positive and negative information. **Positive information** is what you know
about someone or something that puts them in a positive light. For example, if
my neighbor does me a favor---say, he watched my dog for me while I was out of
town---that makes me like him. If he does something harmful---maybe he borrowed
one of my tools and never game it back---that might make me like him less.

**Negative information** tends to have a disproportionately large impact on
your perception of someone compared to positive information. A larger cache of
positive information is required to absorb it and dull its effects, just like
food is needed to absorb alcohol.

Here's an example. Suppose your friend tells you a story that someone
rear-ended them at a red light and then drove away---a hit and run. Your
initial reaction would probably be *What a scumbag!* Even more so if your
friend were hurt, physically or financially, from the incident. Now suppose
that later on, you happen to meet someone at a party, and you find that they're
nice to talk to and you get along well. But then you discover that this was the
same person who drove off after hitting your friend's car. I think most of us
in this situation would turn on a dime and say, "*You're* that scumbag!" (Or at
least we would think it.)

_Now_ imagine that, instead, it was your friend in the first place who hit
another person's car and drove away. Or your brother or sister. Or your partner
or spouse. We're all calibrated a bit differently, so I'm not sure where your
line is; but I feel confident we all have _someone_ in our lives for whom, upon
hearing a story like that, our first reaction wouldn't be *You scumbag*; it'd
be more like *Why did you do that? I know you're not a bad person, so there
must be some explanation*.

In this second scenario the key difference is that we would have enough
positive information---from this person being our friend, or sibling, or
partner/spouse---to absorb the negative. The strongest effect of that negative
information, which for someone else might fall anywhere from a harsh judgment
to downright loathing, would be weakened.

You might relate to this. I've seen the manifestation of this phenomenon in my
own life when talking to friends about someone they don't know. For example,
let's say I have a friend name Phil. We are good friends, but Phil is a loose
cannon (someone who acts impulsively). While Phil and I have plenty of good and
bad experiences together, the ones that make the most entertaining _stories_
are the ones involving Phil being a loose cannon and getting us both into
trouble.

To a friend who doesn't know Phil personally, the stories I tell might make him
seem like a pretty bad dude. Eventually they might say something to me like,
"Why are you even _friends_ with Phil? He sounds like a total jerk." What I
haven't taken into account in this scenario is that my friend doesn't know
Phil, so they don't have the warehouse of positive information (i.e. our
meaningful and worthwhile experiences together as friends) that, for me, offset
all the negative information. They are "drunk" on negative information about
Phil. They never ate dinner.

As the manager of a team in an office that's two time zones away from my boss
and the rest of the team's leadership, this is incredibly important to me. I
need to recognize how critical it is to supply those in my company's other
offices with a steady diet of positive information; otherwise minor screw-ups
or snarky comments that make their way to those offices can become amplified
and present a distorted picture of reality.

It's also incredibly important for leaders of distributed teams in general to
understand this: if you manage a team that's far away from you---whether
literally or figuratively[^figuratively]---know that having limited information
may make you overly sensitive to the negative, and do you what you can to
compensate for that.

But the lesson also applies to everyday life. To bring it back to the analogy:
if you find yourself enjoying a "drink" of negative information, whether it be
gossip, a juicy story, or something else, think to yourself, *Have I eaten
dinner?* Do you have enough positive information to absorb the negative? If
not, maybe it's time to stop for a bite to eat.

[^full-meal]: I assume it has something to do with the food in your body "absorbing" the alcohol; at least, that's how we generally talk about it, though I have no real idea what's happening on a physiological level.

[^figuratively]: Maybe they're in the same town as you but you work in different buildings and don't see one another often.
