---
title: The house with many rooms
date: 2018-08-26
published: true
---

*Note: this post was [published in 60 minutes][1].*

There's an analogy I've used many times to describe Bitbucket, both to my team
as well as to outsiders. It works for Bitbucket but I think it works for plenty
of other software projects I've worked on, and even for everyday life. Anyway,
the analogy is this: Bitbucket is like a house with many rooms and only a small
staff to maintain it. Some of the rooms are neat and tidy; but given the
limited size of the staff, many of the rooms are a total mess.

When you first join the staff that maintains this house, you don't have much
context. You may have *seen* the house before. Maybe you've even been inside it
for a social event, in which case you've probably seen the dining room, the
living room, perhaps a bar area or a study. But you haven't seen the attic, the
cellar, many of the storage closets, etc.

So in your first few weeks, you find yourself discovering some of these rooms
you've never seen before, and they're messy and in poor condition, and you
think, "How is this house still standing? It is being so neglected!" If you're
easily discouraged, this is probably about the time you start looking for a new
house. But if you're more of a roll-up-your-sleeves type, you just might start
looking for ways to make things better.

The truth is that most of the staff were in your same shoes when they joined.
What most of them have done is come to the conclusion, "I can't maintain _all_
of these rooms. I will pick 1 or 2 and look after them." And so the reason that
the dining room is kept clean, and the living room is well maintained, is that
these are the rooms that the staff have determined to be the most important.
The storage closet with the brooms and mops---i.e. those places where guests
never set foot---not so much.

The reason I said this analogy works for everyday life is that this really is
true of so many things: from the outside, things appear orderly; but from the
inside, you can see the chaos. It's true of software projects, it's true of
companies, and it's true of people (ever notice how all of your *acquaintances*
seem to have everything together, but your closest friends and family are
always dealing with some sort of drama?) and their lives. And it is precisely
because most of us prioritize those parts of our lives and our work that are
visible from the outside.

I should clarify something. I recognize that this analogy could easily be
misconstrued as: *Everything's broken and you're never going to be able to fix
it, so just accept it.* That's not my point! The point of the analogy is this:
when you find a messy room, don't assume it's because the keepers of the house
are lazy, or disorganized, or don't care. Acknowledge that it's a big house.
Take the time to explore it and see for yourself which rooms get the most use,
and which are well kept (you should see a correlation). After a while, you will
start to get a feel for where you can make the biggest impact.

And when you've reached that point, all that's left to do is to grab a broom
and get to work.

[1]: /posts/published-in-60-minutes.html
