---
title: The business goal
date: 2018-09-30
published: false
---

The team met up on Monday morning, as they always did to discuss the items in
their backlog and make sure every ticket was well defined and properly scoped.

"Let's discuss Alice's ticket," said Bob, the product owner. "Alice, the
summary here says _Configure auto-scaling for the worker queues_. That sounds
like a technical solution. Remind me, what's the actual business goal there?"

Alice fidgeted in her seat, as all engineers do under the light of a business
person's attention. "Well, I guess it's to make sure the system stays healthy
under production load," she managed to say. "If we don't have enough workers to
keep up with the queues, message processing could be delayed and eventually our
servers might run out of memory and crash."

Bob thought for a moment. "All right, so it sounds like if we don't set up
auto-scaling, we might not be able to handle peak traffic; is that right?"
Alice nodded. "Then let's update the summary on this ticket to _Prepare the
system for peak traffic_. How does that sound?"

Alice shrugged. "I guess that's fine."

The next day, Bob met with his supervisor, Carol. While they went over the
state of Bob's project, Carol pointed to an item that caught her interest.
"This one here," she said, pointing to Alice's ticket. "It says _Prepare the
system for peak traffic_. That sounds like a technical concern. What's the
business goal there?"

Bob cleared his throat. "Well, I guess we don't want the system to crash while
our users are trying to use it," he said. "That could cause our customers to
lose faith in us and hurt our brand."

Carol nodded. "If I may," she said, taking Bob's laptop and editing the field,
"perhaps we change this to: _Protect the brand by prevent an embarrassing
outage_." She handed the laptop back to Bob. "Does that capture what we're
_really_ after here?"

Bob shrugged. "I suppose so."

The following day, Carol was chatting with the VP of the department when Bob's
project came up. She mentioned that one of Bob's devs was working on preventing
an outage in order to avoid embarrassment. "Hmm," the VP said. "But I wonder,
is embarrassment itself really what matters to us here? What's the actual
_business_ goal?"

Carol considered the question. After a pause, she replied, "I suppose it isn't
really embarrassment or the brand's reputation that matters, per se, as long as
we continue to acquire customers."

The VP smiled. "That's right. And just to drive the point home: if there were
some project that would trash our brand and humiliate all of us, but it secured
us a steady stream of paying customers indefinitely? I'd greenlight that
project in a heartbeat."

Carol left the conversation in deep thought. When she got back to her desk, she
e-mailed Bob. _Thinking we might still want to tweak that ticket about
preventing an outage_, she wrote. _Real goal is to keep customer acquisition
healthy. How about "Protect customer acquisition after increased exposure"?_

The next day was Thursday, the day of the VP's weekly debrief with the CEO. The
VP mentioned that there were some concerns about possible disruptions to
customer acquisition and that efforts were underway to protect against those
potential disruptions. "I don't actually care about customer acquisition," the
CEO said. "What matters is profit. Even if we never acquired another paying
customer, as long as we continued to keep costs down and steadily grow our
revenue, that would be just fine."

On Friday the CEO was at a meeting with investors, talking about some of the
challenges facing the business. She expressed concern that the company's
profitability could take a hit in the near future.

After the meeting one of the investors pulled her aside. "Listen," he said,
"profitability is a means to an end. At the end of the day, what we all really
care about is the return on our investment. Run a profitable business, or get
that valuation up and sell. Just make us that return and we'll all be happy."

Over the weekend the investor was at a party, where he recounted his
conversation with the CEO the day before to one of his friends. The friend
gave him a worried look and said, "You work so hard, always chasing that
ROI. But what is it you're really after? Why do you need so much money?"

The investor ruminated the question. "I suppose if I'm honest," he said at
last, "I'm exhausted, and I just want to retire. I don't actually care about
the money. I just want to get to a point where I can _stop_ working so much,
without having to worry about taking care of my family and living comfortably."

That night the investor talked with his wife, Grace. "I've been thinking," he
said. "I would like for us both to retire in the next few years, so we can
spend more time with the kids and just relax."

"That would be nice," Grace agreed. "But is _that_ actually what we want? To
relax? I feel there must be more to life than that."

On Sunday, Grace met with her spiritual advisor. "My husband is thinking about
retirement," she said. "He wants us both to stop working and just relax, but
I wonder if we should instead be thinking about doing something more meaningful
with our lives."

The advisor closed his eyes and took a deep breath. "And what would be more
meaningful?" he asked her.

Grace thought long and hard. She decided to meditate on it. After many nights
of deep meditation, she realized that she felt called to help others. She
worked with her husband to found a non-profit geared at helping uneducated
workers acquire the skills necessary to start a career in tech.

A student went through this program and was granted an internship at a local
tech company. After going through orientation, the student met his new team and
had a seat at his new desk. As he got settled in, his new boss came up to him.

"We're excited to have you on the team!" said the boss. "No rush, but once
you've finished working through our onboarding materials, I've already got a
little project ready for you. I've already sent you some information about it.
Just look in your inbox for the subject line _Configure auto-scaling for the
worker queues_."
