---
title: Advice vs. guidelines
date: 2019-06-21
published: false
---

Here's a concept I often find myself mentally coming back to. I frequently want
to use these terms in conversation, but I refrain because I am aware whoever
I'm talking to doesn't have a shared understanding of what I mean by these
terms. So this is me writing it down so that I can link to it in the future.

**Advice** is a suggestion you give someone to be helpful to them as an
individual.

**Guidelines** are instructions you give to everyone in a group, to be helpful
to the group as a whole.

The key difference is in what you're treating as constant. When you give
advice, you aren't trying to change the system; you're just trying to help one
person within the system. You take the system itself for granted. Advice is
unopinionated about whether the system is good or bad.

Guidelines define how a system should be. When you define guidelines, you _are_
trying to change the system. You're writing down how you think things should
work.

Logically, the people with the authority to control a system write guidelines
while those with no authority dispense advice.

Here's an example. Suppose you're visiting a friend in another country and
your luggage gets lost. You ask an airline employee for help, but they say
there's nothing they can do. Your friend knows corruption is rampant, so she
suggests that you offer the employee a bribe. This would be _advice_: your
friend obviously knows that corruption is wrong, but she's not trying to change
the system right now. She's treating the fact that the system is corrupt as a
given and focusing on helping you, her friend.

Now imagine that the airport authority decides to formalize this advice in the
form of guidelines. Suppose that be helpful to the entire population of
travelers in the airport, they print out signs reading "If your luggage is
lost, please bribe an airline employee to help you" and post them around all
the baggage claims. This would be outrageous. Suddenly the idea of bribery has
been enshrined: it's not just how the system works, it's how the system is
_meant_ to work. There's a big difference.

Here's another example. My wife and I have traveled to many other countries. In
some of the places we've visited, it isn't safe for women to go out alone at
night due to high rates of violent crime against women. When the locals in
these places have advised my wife not to go out after dark without me, that has
been helpful advice. Of course this doesn't mean that women should not be
allowed to go outside at night without their husbands. These individuals are
trying to be helpful: they can't stop the crime themselves, so they treat it as
a given and offer suggestions to avoid it.

One last example. If my friend is interviewing for a new job and he gets as far
as salary negotiations, I will probably tell him to lie about what he's
currently making. This is because I know that in many cases the recruiter or
hiring manager he's meeting with will try to offer him as little as they can.
I don't _like_ that companies try to pay their employees as little as possible;
but when I'm looking to help one person (my friend) within
the system, I will take the system as it is for granted.

Sometimes we mistake advice for guidelines, and vice versa. This can be the
result of a mismatch in perceived authority. For example, as a manager, I might
offer advice to someone on my team that, if I'm not careful, they'll interpret
as guidelines and communicate to their peers as such. I might not see myself as
having the power to change the system, but they might think that I do, hence
the disconnect.

Now flip the salary example around and pretend you're in control of the system:
you're running your own company, so you get to decide how salaries are
determined. Would you say, "We'll ask candidates what they're currently making,
assume they're lying, and negotiate them down to something that seems closer to
reality"? Hopefully not. That doesn't feel[^feel] like how the system _should_
work. I'd like to think that if I'm running my own company one day, it would be
more like: "We'll establish a standard salary for every role we need, and when
we hire someone into that role that's what we'll pay them."

Of course, if that isn't how every _other_ company does things, that could put
my company at a disadvantage. Maybe I'll end up paying junior employees more
than I should, or I'll miss out on top talent because my offers aren't high
enough. When I start thinking along these lines, I become doubtful of my
ability to define the system after all; and when I don't believe I can change
the system, I don't bother writing guidelines, I just give advice.

If this distinction makes sense to you, you'll probably start to notice the
difference between advice and guidelines a lot.

[^feel]: Well, it doesn't feel that way to _me_, anyway! Maybe if I were a diehard capitalist.
