---
title: On being promoted
date: 2019-07-15
published: false
---

Here's a little tip I received fairly early in my career. I've received this
tip in various forms from various people, but the following is a direct quote
from a boss I had not too long ago:

> operate as if you already have the job that you want and then you'll be
> promoted and everyone will be surprised, thinking you had been in that role
> all along

For anyone who wants to be promoted, this is great advice. Getting a promotion
is ultimately a matter of _convincing_ someone---sometimes it's your manager,
sometimes it's a committee---that you'll be effective in a new role. And the
easiest way to convince someone of something [is always to do all of the work
for them](/posts/dont-make-me-think.html).

I recently wrote about [advice vs. guidelines](/posts/advice-vs-guidelines)
because I wanted to write about this topic. While the above tip is great
_advice_, it does not make for great guidelines. In fact, as a guideline, I
would say that it's both unfair and harmful. To explain why I think this, I
will start by describing the dual nature of promotions.

There are at least two aspects to a promotion: **recognition**, and
**opportunity**. In my experience, every promotion decision involves both of
these aspects to some degree; but one of them often dominates the conversation
depending on the circumstances and the culture of the organization. My opinion
is that at most companies, the promotion process over-emphasizes recognition,
particularly as employees get further along in their careers.

![Recognition is past-focused, opportunity is future-focused](/images/recognition-vs-opportunity.png)

Recognition is **past-focused** and **person-focused**. Employees are
recognized for the work they've done, the value they've provided. When you give
someone a promotion as recognition, you are saying, "This is for all of the
great work you've done so far. You've earned it!"

Opportunity, the other facet, is **future-focused** and **role-focused**.
Employees are given greater responsibility to take on a new role moving
forward, generally to fill a business need. When you give someone a promotion
as an opportunity, you are saying, "We need someone to do this, and we believe
you are capable."

Recognition-based promotions are generally not blocked by anything other than
budgetary constraints. Take a group of individuals, put them all in the same
entry-level role for several years, and most of them should have been promoted
by the end of that period simply for having done good work. Most roles at most
companies have some tiered structure allowing for individuals to be promoted in
this way at least once or twice. This might look something like:

![A typical tiered structure for promotions](/images/recognition-based-promotions.png)

Looking at the tiered structure above, my observation is that promotions tend
to be more about recognition on the left (e.g. being promoted from Junior
Developer to Developer) and more about opportunity on the right (e.g. a
promotion from Lead Developer to Principal Developer), because there are fewer
openings for the positions on the right based on business need.

This is why opportunity-based promotions tend to be more of a bottleneck. You
cannot simply give everyone in a group the same opportunity in a new role
because there may not be a business need for that many individuals in the role.
As an easy example: if everyone in the group wants to become a manager, it does
not make sense to promote them all as then there will be no team to manage! In
general, most management tracks have this issue as the nature of management is
that there are fewer roles available the higher up you go.

![Promotions on a management track tend to be more opportunity-based](/images/opportunity-based-promotions.png)

Earlier I wrote that, as a guideline, the expectation that employees should do
the job they want to get is both unfair and harmful. (Again, it's great
_advice_ for an individual; it's a bad guideline for an entire organization.)
Let me explain why.

This guideline focuses on the _recognition_ aspect, i.e. the past-focused
aspect of promotions. To the employee, it says, "Your manager is going to look
at your past. Make it so that when they look at your past, what they see is you
already doing the job, so they don't feel they're taking a risk on you."

Meanwhile, when we look to _hire_ someone into a role, their past is
essentially unavailable. Hiring by necessity must focus on the future and the
value that you expect a candidate _will_ provide in the role. Therefore hiring
is more like an opportunity-based promotion as opposed to a recognition-based
promotion.

This is unfair because it places a greater burden on existing employees than it
does on external candidates. When your organization's policy is defined as the
guideline above, as an internal candidate you must demonstrate your ability to
deliver in a role---potentially for an extended period of time (12 months or
more is not uncommon)---while an external candidate simply has to spend a few
hours convincing their interviewers and the hiring manager they can do it.

This is harmful because the resulting lack of internal mobility causes serious
damage to morale. Employees notice that roles that seem perpetually out of
reach to them seem to get filled with relatively little difficulty by external
candidates.
