---
title: The case for promoting over hiring
date: 2019-07-18
published: false
---

Here's a little tip I received fairly early in my career. I've heard this in
various forms from various people, but the following is a direct quote from a
boss I had not long ago:

> Operate as if you already have the job that you want and then you'll be
> promoted and everyone will be surprised, thinking you had been in that role
> all along.

## Good advice, bad guideline

For anyone who wants to be promoted, this is great advice. Getting a promotion
is ultimately a matter of _convincing_ someone---sometimes it's your manager,
sometimes it's a committee---that you'll be effective in a new role. And the
easiest way to convince someone of something [is always to do all of the work
for them](/posts/dont-make-me-think.html). Put another way, the advice says:
"Make the decision easy for your manager by doing the job you want, so they
don't feel they're taking a risk on you."

I recently wrote about [advice vs. guidelines](/posts/advice-vs-guidelines)
because I wanted to write about this topic. While the above tip is great
_advice_, it does not make for great guidelines.  To explain why I think this,
I will start by describing the dual nature of promotions.

## Reward vs. opportunity

A promotion is two things: a **reward**, and an **opportunity**. In my
experience, every promotion decision involves both of these aspects to some
degree; but one of them often dominates the conversation depending on the
circumstances and the culture of the organization. My opinion is that at most
companies, the promotion process over-emphasizes reward, particularly as
employees get further along in their careers.

![A reward is based on the past, an opportunity is based on the future](/images/reward-vs-opportunity.png)

A reward is **past-focused** and is about the **person**. Employees are
recognized for the work they've done, the value they've provided. When you give
someone a promotion as a reward, you are saying, "This is for all of the great
work you've done so far. You've earned it!" The emphasis is on _you_ and what
you've _done_.

An opportunity is **future-focused** and is about the **role**. Employees are
given greater responsibility to take on a new role moving forward, generally to
fill a business need. When you give someone a promotion as an opportunity, you
are saying, "We need someone to do this, and we believe you are capable." The
emphasis is on the _role_, and what you _will be expected to do_ in it.

Reward-based promotions are generally not blocked by anything other than
budgetary constraints. Take a group of individuals, put them all in the same
entry-level role for several years, and most of them should have been promoted
by the end of that period simply for having done good work. Most career tracks
at most companies have some tiered structure allowing for individuals to be
promoted in this way at least once or twice. This might look something like:

<figure>
    <img alt="A typical tiered structure for promotions" src="/images/recognition-based-promotions.png" style="max-height: 90px;" />
    <figcaption>A typical tiered structure for promotions</figcaption>
</figure>

Looking at the tiered structure above, my observation is that promotions tend
to be more like rewards on the left (e.g. being promoted from Junior Developer
to Developer) and more genuine opportunities on the right (e.g. a promotion
from Lead Developer to Principal Developer), because there are fewer openings
for the positions on the right based on business need.

Opportunity-based promotions are therefore more of a bottleneck. You cannot
simply give everyone in a group the same opportunity in a new role because
there may not be a business need for that many individuals in the role. As an
easy example: if everyone in the group wants to become a manager, it does not
make sense to promote them all as then there will be no team to manage! In
general, most management tracks have this issue as the nature of management is
that there are fewer roles available the higher up you go.

<figure>
    <img alt="Promotions on a management track tend to be more opportunity-based" src="/images/opportunity-based-promotions.png" style="max-height: 90px;" />
    <figcaption>Promotions on a management track tend to be more opportunity-based</figcaption>
</figure>

## The problematic distance between promotions and hiring

Now again consider the idea that you should do the job you want in order to be
promoted. Again, my position is that this is great _advice_ for an individual,
but a bad _guideline_ for an entire organization. The distinction between
reward vs. opportunity should help me explain why.

This guideline focuses on the past. In that way it treats all promotions as if
they are rewards. This becomes increasingly inappropriate the higher
up you go in level. The positions with the most responsibility are not rewards;
they're opportunities.

Meanwhile, when we look to _hire_ someone into a role, their past is
essentially unavailable. You do not reward a new hire for the great work
they've done for your organization, because they haven't done any. Hiring by
necessity must therefore focus on the future and the value that you expect a
candidate _will_ provide in the role. Hiring is always about filling a business
need; it is always about providing an opportunity.

Now imagine that a fairly senior role has opened up in your department and
someone needs to fill it. Two candidates emerge: an existing employee and an
external candidate. When your organization's policy is defined as the guideline
above, these individuals are faced with dramatically different requirements.
The internal candidate must have already demonstrably operated in the
role---potentially for an extended period of time (12 months or more is not
uncommon)---while the external candidate simply has to convince their
interviewers and the hiring manager they can do the job. The internal candidate
is judged by their past; the external candidate is judged by their perceived
future.

When you've worked hard for years to prove yourself and get a promotion, only
to see someone else hired into the same role without having to jump through any
hoops, it can stir up resentment.

A potentially even bigger problem is the paradigm this creates (really I should
say, the paradigm it _has_ created in the industry), where it is typically much
easier to obtain a role that you want by going through another company's
hiring process rather than your own company's promotion process. This is a
recipe for losing your best senior people[^best-senior-people].

## How it needs to change

My conclusion is very easy to say but I realize that it's not so easy to put
into practice. It starts with understanding the inherent lack of fairness in a
system where promotions are viewed as rewards, which are focused on the past,
leaving a vacuum for hiring to fill as the primary means of filling roles based
on business need, i.e. granting opportunities. From there, the change I would
like to see most organizations make is a shift towards providing more
opportunity internally. Practically speaking what this means is more hiring at
the bottom and promoting to the top.

For example, if your team needs a technical leader (maybe that's called a
Principal Developer in your organization), rather than hiring a Principal
Developer externally, give one of the more senior members on the team a
promotion and hire someone junior to backfill them.

One of the most obvious reasons we don't do this is that it feels like taking a
big risk, giving someone an opportunity when they haven't irrefutably proven
themselves. What if they aren't up to the task[^up-to-the-task]?

The reality is that you're taking a big risk either way. Whether you're looking
at someone external or someone internal who hasn't already been doing the job
for a year or more, you can't know for sure how they'll perform in the role. At
least the internal candidate has proven themselves capable in their _current_
role; and they've contributed to your organization for this long and want a
chance to do more, which is more than you can say (yet) for someone external.

As an organization evolves and grows, there will continue to be new roles that
_someone_ has to fill, creating opportunities. Choosing who receives these
opportunities is ultimately about believing in people. And don't underestimate
the amount of good you can do, for your employees and for the organization as a
whole, by believing in the people you have.

[^best-senior-people]: The cynic in me recognizes that at some companies, this might actually be the evil master plan: out with the old, in with the new!

[^up-to-the-task]: Personally, I am a fan of explicit trial programs for things like this---Atlassian for example recently launched an apprentice manager program for employees who are interested in becoming managers---though that comes with risks as well.
