---
title: Focus time is not petty cash
date: 2020-06-27
published: true
---

Budgets are useful when you have a limited amount of something and discipline
is required to use it appropriately given your needs and priorities.

For example, if you have a limited amount of monthly income (i.e. you are a
normal person), a typical monthly budget would allocate a certain amount to
your housing expenses, another amount to food, perhaps some more necessities
(e.g. medicine, commuting to work), and then the remainder would be divided
according to your preferences. One person might have a budget for dining out,
another for travel, another for classes, etc.

![A typical monthly budget might look something like this](/images/typical-monthly-budget.png)

Enforcing a budget requires categorizing every expense, which represents some
administrative overhead. For sufficiently small expenses, the cost of this
overhead could actually exceed the expense itself. As an optimization to reduce
this overhead, a common practice among businesses is to budget some small
amount of _petty cash_ that can be used at individuals' discretion for any
purpose. This is literally cash that sits in a drawer or box that anyone can
withdraw from to pay for office supplies or other miscellaneous things.

What's great about petty cash is that you don't need to fill out any paperwork
or get approval from a supervisor to spend it.

What would happen if your *entire budget* were petty cash?

Imagine that at the start of every month, you withdrew all of your last month's
income as cash and put it in a drawer. Rather than set aside any specific
amount of that cash for any specific purpose, you simply withdrew from the
drawer whenever you wanted, for any reason. If you felt like treating yourself
to coffee and a donut one morning, you'd take some cash from the drawer. If you
felt like going out for a drink with your friends, you'd take some cash from
the drawer. If you felt like heading to Best Buy and purchasing a new TV, you'd
take some cash from the drawer.

What could go wrong in this scenario? Hopefully it's obvious: by treating all
of your money as petty cash, you could very easily run _out_ of money without
having covered your necessities. You might find that your rent is due and you
can't pay it. Or you might realize that your refrigerator is empty and you have
no money to buy more food.

![What could happen if your whole budget were petty cash](/images/spending-without-budget.png)

There's another limited resource that we all need to budget for: our **time**.
And unlike money, there are very few ways to create more of it. This makes the
need for a thoughtful budget all the more important, because there are things
that we *need* that require our time, and without ensuring we make time for
those things, we neglect those needs.

Any organization that employs knowledge workers, such as a technology company,
*needs* for those workers to be able to focus in order to complete their tasks.
That [context switching directly leads to lost productivity][1] is, by now,
well-researched and documented. And yet far too often, **we treat our time like
petty cash**: the drawer is filled at the start of the day, week, or month, and
anyone is free to withdraw for any reason.

I am certainly guilty of not budgeting my time as well as I should, and the
result is clear. This is what my calendar looks like on a typical week.

![A calendar filled with meetings and almost no focus time](/images/typical-week.png)

Without a doubt, some of this is on me for not being more protective of my
time. But I can't help but wonder if this is not something that should be
addressed at an organizational level as well. Any company that needs its
workers to focus would be wise to define a budget for their time and provide
some structure to ensure it is protected. The alternative is that every
individual at the company needs to come up with their own system (which can
cause friction, e.g. when the prevailing culture is pro-meeting and you're
therefore seen as difficult for declining an invite in order to guard your
time).

Whenever someone on my team incurs a business expense (e.g. for a trip, or more
recently for work-from-home supplies), they submit a report for my approval. I
have to approve it, then someone from the finance team reviews it, ensuring the
team isn't exceeding whatever budget the expense falls under; and then
eventually the team member is reimbursed by the company i.e. the money is
actually spent.

On the other hand, whenever someone wants to schedule a _meeting_, they just
put it on the calendar and invite as many participants as they want. No one has
to approve this expense. No one is making sure that we aren't eating into our
focus time budget. In essence, our time is in a big petty cash drawer.

---

I suspect there's a better way, but it can get tricky when you collaborate with
teammates in multiple time zones across the world, not to mention that for any
organization that has operated in time-as-petty-cash mode for any significant
amount of time, their employees' calendars are likely by now a chaotic mess of
puzzle pieces that don't fit together.

Regardless, I know I'm onto something, because just about every conversation
I've had with colleagues on this subject has involved spirited head-nodding and
often ended in "I would love it if we could do something about that." So the
next step for me is to come up with a plan for how an organization that has
this problem can start putting budgets in place and restoring focus time for
its workers. Perhaps a modest plan, perhaps a plan that tackles the problem
incrementally over a period of months, but a plan nonetheless.

I'll let you know how it goes.

[1]: https://www.apa.org/research/action/multitask
