---
title: The need for courage
date: 2020-12-27
published: false
---

Last night my wife asked me what I wanted my "word" for 2021 to be. I hadn't
considered that before, and my initial reaction was that it felt like a strange
premise for a question: to want to encapsulate all of your hopes and intentions
for an entire year into a single word. Regardless, after thinking for a minute
or two, I gave an answer.

The question stayed with me and has felt less strange the longer I've
considered it. If I imagine myself as an elderly man looking back on the years
I've lived, it seems plausible, and even oddly desirable, that I should be able
to distill every one of those years---and I hope there will be many more to
come---down to a single word. Some years are a given: the year each of my
children was born, for example, would be named after them. "San Francisco"
could be another year (although I guess that's two words), and "Austin" could
be another, for the years we moved to those cities.

At the end of 2020 I was given the opportunity to become the Head of
Engineering for Bitbucket Cloud, a product I've worked on and loved for now
more than half a decade. (That may or may not sound like a long time to you. To
_me_ it sounds like an eternity!) Meanwhile in both my personal life and in the
world, like many others, I have come to expect the unexpected unlike ever
before over the past year. As for 2021, I want to change my answer.

It feels a little dramatic to say, but as of right now my word for 2021 is
going to be **courage**.

I should explain what I mean by "courage". I believe that many of us, when we
learn the word as children, learn it incorrectly. We think it means _not being
afraid_. We picture the valiant hero fearlessly charging into battle, ready to
fight the forces of evil without breaking a sweat.

That isn't courage to me. I don't picture a fearless warrior; I picture Abraham
ascending the mountain in Moriah with [fear and trembling][1]. Courage is when
you *are* afraid of something, but you do it anyway, because you believe it's
right.

I admitted it felt a little dramatic to pick "courage" as my word for the year.
It sounds like something big, a word reserved for epic moments of bravery. But
I see opportunities for courage everywhere, starting with the smallest of
interactions and the decisions we make every day.

When you're new to a team and not sure how something works, it takes courage to
put yourself out there and ask, even if you're afraid of sounding unintelligent
or clueless. (It can take even more courage to ask when you're _not_ new to the
team!) When you see room for growth in a teammate or colleague, it takes
courage to offer constructive criticism, even if you're afraid it could be
awkward or tense. When someone challenges your beliefs, it takes courage to
respond with an open mind, even if you're afraid of being wrong.

As a father, some of my proudest moments are when my children display true
courage. I see it when my son, who can be quite shy, decides to walk up to
another child and introduce himself. I see it when my daughter, who tends to
freak out over the slightest physical pain, decides to dust herself off and get
back in the game after a particularly bad scrape.

The answer I initially gave for 2021 was that I wanted to be more "deliberate".
Those who have worked with me over the past 5 years know that I am a huge
believer in documentation. I _love_ [descriptive commit messages][2]. Within
Atlassian, with every project I do my best to document key decisions as they're
made, providing a historical record so that we can always go back and remind
ourselves why we decided to do things a certain way, and possibly revisit the
assumptions we made at the time. I've written a meta post called "Write it
down" which I share at just about every opportunity, encouraging everyone I
work with to write things down, explain their reasons, and acknowledge the
trade-offs they've made.

I still think that being deliberate is important. We should always strive to
understand why we do the things we do, both to be able to justify them but also
to learn from our mistakes, to help us adapt and change. But this isn't enough.
Deliberation alone can provide clarity, but clarity on its own provides limited
value unless accompanied by action.

Something I've noticed as I have taken on more and more responsibility in both
my career and my personal life is that responsibility provides a natural source
of inertia when it comes to making and executing decisions. As an individual
contributor with limited responsibility, it is often easy to have opinions and
be able to justify them: very little is on the line for you personally. It's a
very different story when you are accountable for the consequences of putting
your opinions into effect. If and when things go wrong---and typically, even
when many things go right, at least a _few_ things also go wrong---it is on
your shoulders.

I believe good leadership requires a combination of deliberation and courage.
There are leaders who are thoughtful in their planning but who are slow to act,
missing strategic opportunities or allowing problems to go unaddressed for too
long. There are also leaders who prefer to act switftly, without putting enough
thought into understanding the impact of their actions. Often these leaders are
more like the fearless warrior: they aren't afraid _because_ they haven't
contemplated the costs or unintended side effects their decisions might have.

Then there are those who take the time to define their principles and
communicate them clearly so everyone understands them. They apply these
principles to every decision they have to make, and they accept the costs of
these decisions explicitly. They may fear some of those costs---in many cases,
it would be irrational _not_ to---but they move forward anyway.

In 2021, I hope not only to be deliberate in my decision-making, but also to
have the courage to make hard decisions, when I'm confident they're the right
decisions.

[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fear_and_Trembling
[2]: https://dhwthompson.com/2019/my-favourite-git-commit
