---
title: Peace-time policies in a wartime reality
date: 2020-02-13
published: false
---

The city council meets to discuss policies. The first order of business is that
much of the city's infrastructure is in poor condition: roads and bridges are
damaged, public facilities are in disrepair. The council knows they have
workers employed to address these matters. They conclude the workers must lack
visibility into the problems they need to address, or else their priorities
need to be corrected.

So the council agrees on some new policies to ensure the city's infrastructure
is repaired and maintained. They devise a sensible prioritization scheme,
starting with roads and bridges and ranking the most widely-used facilities
above the lesser-used ones. Workers _must_ address these infrastructure issues
above all else. This should ensure that the issues will be addressed.

Time passes. The situation improves slightly, but not much; and some members of
the council have heard grumblings from some of the workers' managers. The
council reconvenes to discuss the matter. Everyone agrees that the importance
of infrastructure must be reiterated, that workers must truly understand how
critical it is that the city's infrastructure be maintained.

A bold idea is proposed: the council should impose deadlines on these
infrastructural problems, and failure to meet a deadline will raise an alarm
forcing the team of workers responsible for dropping everything and addressing
the issue immediately. It might not be pleasant, but it is necessary to ensure
these matters are dealt with. The proposal is brought to a vote and passed
unanimously.

More time passes. Deadlines are not being met. Alarms are being raised. Some
managers come to the council to voice their concerns that the deadlines aren't
reasonable, that their teams have other responsibilities. Some of the work
they're being told to do isn't actually the most important work. Council
members listen patiently to these managers' concerns, but repeat the message
that this work is in fact critical. Managers explain that their teams simply
don't have the resources to do all of the work by the imposed deadlines.

The council hires a team of consultants. The consultants conduct an evaluation
of the infrastructural issues that are assigned to various teams of workers
throughout the city. They conclude that the scope of work really ought to be
achievable with the workers available. They suggest that if more resources are
needed, managers should provide documentation of what the resources are needed
for. The council agrees.

One day, a curious council members decides to descend from the council's
private chamber down into the city itself. As they enter the city, they
immediately see people sick and hungry in the streets. Workers are busily
distributing food and medical supplies. The council member comes to one of the
city gates and realizes that bands of marauders are actively attacking. Teams
of workers are engaged in battle, holding off the marauders but suffering heavy
losses.

The council member rushes off to safety, escaping into one of the public
restrooms near the town square. They see a worker fixing a leaky toilet. "What
are you doing here?" the council member asks. "Your teammates are being
attacked outside! They need your help!" The worker nods, expressionless. "My
manager told me to fix this toilet," they say. "But you're right. It doesn't
matter now anyway because the deadline is in 2 minutes."

Unsettled, the council member leaves the restroom and observes the battle at
the city gate from a safe distance. As the fight rages on, an alarm sounds from
the nearby watchtower. Throughout the city a robotic voice is heard:
"Your attention please. There has been a maintenance exception. Team 14A please
halt other activities and address the following exception: TOILET LEAK IN
RESTROOM 6FZ. This exception has been reported to the city council. Thank you."

As these words echo through the streets, the council member watches the workers
of Team 14A strike down the last of this band of raiders, many of them having
sustained injuries. The healthy workers distribute tasks among themselves: some
carry the injured away for medical assistance, others set to work repairing the
gate which was destroyed by the attackers. One worker leaves the group, walking
tiredly past the council member into restroom 6FZ. As the worker shuts the door
behind them, the countil member wonders private whether the policies the
council has established are appropriate given the conditions on the ground.
