---
title: Thoughts on courage
date: 2020-12-24
published: false
---

Last night my wife asked me what I wanted my "word" for 2021 to be. I hadn't
considered that question, and my initial reaction was that it felt like a
strange premise for a question: to want to encapsulate all of your hopes and
intentions for an entire year into a single word. Regardless, after thinking
for a moment, I gave an answer.

The question stayed with me and has felt less strange the longer I've
considered it. If I imagine myself as an elderly man looking back on the life
I've lived, it seems plausible, and even oddly desirable, that I should be able
to distill every one of those years---and I hope there will be many more to
come---down to a single word. Some years are a given: the year each of my
children was born, for example, would be named after them. "San Francisco"
could be another year (if that isn't cheating!), and "Austin" could be another.

At the end of 2020 I was given the opportunity to become the Head of
Engineering for Bitbucket Cloud, a product I've worked on and loved for now
more than half a decade. (That may or may not sound like a long time to you. To
_me_ it sounds like an eternity!) Meanwhile in both my personal life and in the
world I, like many others, have come to expect the unexpected over the past
year probably more than ever before. As for 2021, I want to change my answer.

It feels a little dramatic to say, but as of right now my word for 2021 is
going to be **courage**.

I should explain what I mean by courage. I believe that many of us, when we
learn the word "courage" as children, learn it incorrectly. We think it means
not being afraid. We picture the valiant hero fearlessly charging into battle,
ready to fight the forces of evil without breaking a sweat.

That isn't courage to me. I don't picture a fearless warrior; I picture Abraham
ascending the mountain with [fear and trembling][1]. Courage is when you are
*terrified* of something, but you do it anyway.

I admitted it felt a little dramatic to pick "courage" as my word for the year.
It sounds like something big, a word reserved for epic moments of bravery. But
I see opportunities for courage everywhere, from the smallest interactions to
the high-level decisions that could impact an entire team or organization,
community or nation.

When you're new to a team and not sure how something works, it takes courage to
put yourself out there and ask, even if you're afraid of sounding unintelligent
or clueless. (It can take even more courage to ask when you're _not_ new to the
team!) When you see room for growth in a teammate or colleague, it takes
courage to offer constructive criticism, even if you're afraid it could be
awkward. When someone offers _you_ constructive criticism---or, sometimes,
criticism that's _not_ so constructive---it takes courage to respond with
gratitude, even if you're afraid of being wrong.

As a father, some of my proudest moments are when my children display true
courage. I see it when my son, who can be quite shy, decides to walk up to
another child and introduce himself. I see it when my daughter, who tends to
freak out over the slightest physical pain, decides to dust herself off and get
back in the game after a particularly bad scrape.

The Bitbucket Cloud engineering team has some major challenges ahead of us and
we need to face them with courage as well. (I'm going to write more here for an
internal blog post; for now this paragraph is a placeholder.)

The answer I initially gave for 2021 was that I wanted to be more "deliberate".
Those who have worked with me over the past 5 years know that I am a huge
believer in documentation. I _love_ [descriptive commit messages][2]. Within
Atlassian, with every project I do my best to document key decisions as they're
made, providing a historical record so that we can always go back and remind
ourselves why we decided to do things a certain way, and possibly revisit the
assumptions we made at the time. I've written a meta post called "Write it
down" which I share at just about every opportunity, encouraging everyone I
work with to write things down, explain their reasons, and invite collaboration
from others.

I still think that being deliberate is important. We should always strive to
understand why we do the things we do, both to be able to justify them but also
to learn from our mistakes, to help us adapt and change. But this isn't enough.
Deliberation alone can provide clarity, but clarity on its own provides limited
value unless accompanied by action.

In 2021, I hope not only to be deliberate in my decision-making, but also to
have the courage to make hard decisions, even when I fear the consequences,
when I'm confident they're the right decisions.

[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fear_and_Trembling
[2]: https://dhwthompson.com/2019/my-favourite-git-commit
