---
title: What can I do to help?
date: 2020-06-13
published: true
---

These past couple of weeks have been surreal. On the Bitbucket team, I have
sensed ambient levels of sadness, frustration, and numbness as everyone makes
an effort to be productive and contribute to their teams' projects, even while
I’m sure many of us have had a voice in our heads asking how any of the work
we’re doing matters in the shadow of the terrible systemic problems facing our
society: police brutality, systemic racism, and a pandemic that is
disproportionately killing the poor and underprivileged, just to name a few.

If you’re like me, something you may occasionally be experiencing is the
sensation of being utterly useless. It is a strange feeling, recognizing that I
am the beneficiary of an unjust system, wanting to contribute to a solution,
while at the same time understanding that I have much to learn. As a software
engineer, I am acutely aware that in a complex system, work that is
*well-intentioned* but *ill-informed* is a deadly combination that often does
more harm than good as a result of unwanted side effects.

A common theme in most of the articles I’ve read and videos I’ve watched from
African Americans providing guidance to their fellow citizens is that many of
us need to educate ourselves. Mike Cannon-Brookes recently [shared a blog post
publicly][1]; he also shared a version of this post internally with a great
list of books and other resources. I have started to work through this list,
along with recommendations from friends and other figures I admire.

But what can I do to help right now?

Last week my wife and I watched the Oprah special [*Where do we go from
here?*][2] in which Oprah interviews a number of thought leaders from the
African American community about what’s happening in America right now and what
needs to happen next. In Part 2 of the special, the filmmaker Ava DuVernay
[talks about her own experience][3] and speaks to the role that she can play as
an artist and storyteller. Her point is that we all can do *something*; and
what that *is* will depend on our skills, our background, our social
connections---as she puts it, “working with what you have, where you are”.

Personally, despite all of the uncertainty, I feel grateful to be a part of one
organization in particular that I can confidently say is doing good; and that
is [Code2College][4], a non-profit in Austin that provides computer science
education to high school students from underrepresented groups throughout
Austin and neighboring cities. The organization’s goal is clear: to prepare
students from these groups to pursue college degrees in STEM fields and reduce
attrition rates, in turn improving the economic outlook for these students,
their families, and their communities.

![65% of African American college students drop out of STEM
fields](/images/stem-major-attrition-underrepresented-groups.png)

The work I do with Code2College will not stop any unnecessary acts of police
violence today, or tomorrow. It will not stop the spread of COVID-19. But it is
a small piece of a larger picture---made up of the efforts of everyone working
with what they have, where they are---of what is needed to address the root
causes of many of our society’s problems in the long term.

I’ve spent many years working in software engineering, and it hasn’t always
been obvious to me how the skills I’ve acquired in this field could be valuable
in the fight against inequality. Whether or not you’re an engineer, you may
feel the same way. But when we look for ways to put our skills to use, by
seeking organizations that need what we have to offer, we just might find
opportunities to help out---even as we continue to work on our own
self-education.

I know that I will keep educating myself by reading and listening, and I’m sure
I have a long way to go before I’m delivering all of the value that I should.
I’ve written this post to encourage others who might be feeling similarly to
me, not to put the books down, but to also seek out organizations like
Code2College in your area, to find out what good you might be able to do with
what you have, where you are---and to do it.

[1]: https://www.atlassian.com/blog/announcements/the-standard-you-walk-past-is-the-standard-you-accept
[2]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=09ysfL2SlHo
[3]: https://youtu.be/1jy6LpivqIM?t=2259
[4]: https://code2college.org/
