---
title: What causes burnout?
date: 2021-03-08
published: false
---

I've been thinking about burnout.

It's a topic that comes up often, and the framing is almost always the same:
*The team is feeling burnt out. What can we do to help them recover?* The
proposed answers tend to fall into a few predictable categories: games or other
social activities, encouraging team members to take time off from work, and
gifts.

All of these proposed answers for addressing burnout are good things. I like
social activities! I like for people to take time off from work! I like giving
gifts! However:

1. These tactics are all reactive, not proactive
2. These tactics are also often ineffective

Something most of us don't spend enough time thinking about is how to _prevent_
burnout. We tend to take it for granted that if people are working too much
and not getting enough breaks, burnout is inevitable. And I'm sure there is
some truth to this. But the way I think of burnout highlights some key
variables in this formula that I believe we should be focusing on more.

# Running on empty

To do work, we all need fuel. Call it motivation, energy, bandwidth, whatever
you want; but there is _something_ intangible that we need to get things done,
and it is a finite resource. Some activities consume this resource, while
others replenish it. Most of us can tell when we're running dangerously low on
this fuel. *Burnout* is the feeling you get when you've run out. You can't do
any more work until you refuel.

I like this way of thinking about burnout because it brings two very specific
questions into focus:

1. At what rate are we burning fuel?
2. We can we refuel most effectively?

In my experience, normally _when burnout is a concern_, it's because there is
an underlying problem in the answer to one or both questions.

![Quick to burn, slow to refuel](/images/high-burn-rate.png)

The above image depicts a scenario that's all too typical. Fuel is being burned
_fast_. Team members struggle to feel motivated as the experience of doing
their jobs is draining. I think of this as like having a leaky fuel tank.
Something is causing fuel to be depleted faster than it should.

At the same time, when team members do take time to refuel, it isn't very
effective! Imagine if, to fuel your car, you had to stand at the pump for 1
hour just to be able to drive another 30 minutes. The economics of a situation
like that are dumbfounding. And yet sometimes it can feel like this at work.

# Burning slower

If you have a leaky tank, the logical thing to do is not to stop at a gas
station every 50 miles. The logical response is to find the leak and fix it.

Some examples of things that can make work frustrating, causing fuel to be
depleted too quickly:

- Doing work requires too much _procedural_ overhead: filling out forms,
  submitting tickets, getting approvals for simple things
- Doing work requires too much _technical_ overhead: changes need to be tested
  manually, systems are confusing or difficult to learn, automated builds are
  slow or flaky
- Team members aren't comfortable with their teammates or don't feel supported
- Team members are confused and don't understand the value of what they're
  asked to do
- Team members don't know how to voice their concerns or feel they're being
  ignored by their leaders

No two teams are identical, so only some or none of the above examples may be
applicable to your team. But chances are, if burnout is an issue, there is
_something_ happening at work that's depleting team members' energy faster than
it should be.

# Refueling faster

If you go to the gas station and it takes half a day to fill your tank, the
logical thing to do is not to always budget half a day to refuel whenever
you're out of gas. The logical response is to find a faster way to refuel.

It's easy as a manger to say, "Take tomorrow off" or "Take next week off".
Unfortunately, it's all too common for employees to take time off, only to come
back to work feeling anxious that they've fallen behind. Rather than being
resftul, their time off left them restless.

This is a tragic outcome. The manager _thinks_ they've done the right thing:
they recognized their team member's burnout and they took it seriously. The
team member, meanwhile, still feels burnt out, but now with the added burden of
feeling guilty for being ungrateful.

It's therefore important for managers who are dealing with burnout not to take
the easy route, but rather to work with our teams on finding the best way to
refuel. For example, maybe a team member misses a family member or loved one.
Instead of "Take next week off", which would give them very little time to make
arrangements, their manager could ask them to plan a trip and work with them on
adjusting project plans around it. Meanwhile, another team member might not
_want_ to take time off, but would rather take a break from their current
project to work on something else.

Inevitably, there won't be a one-size-fits-all solution here. The important
thing is that if the goal is to give team members a chance to recharge, we need
to first understand what recharges them.

# What it should look like

This is what we want.

![Slow to burn, quick to refuel](/images/low-burn-rate.png)

Hopefully we've all had the good fortunate to work in environments like this.
The work is enjoyable and fulfilling, so the burn rate is low (no leaky tank).
Meanwhile, when team members _do_ take time to refuel, they're able to spend
the time effectively---traveling, visiting loved ones, pursuing hobbies,
whatever it may be---and they can come back feeling refreshed rather than
overwhelmed.
