---
title: Communication is an outcome
date: 2021-09-17
published: true
---

This is something I've observed countless times in both my personal and
professional life.

Often, I will hear someone say that they sent someone else an email, or a Slack
message, or a text, confident that they communicated important information to
the other person.

It can be the same when a team member says, "I wrote a page about this." Or: "I
published a blog post." Or: "I gave a demo of this."

The fallacy is a misunderstanding of what good communication is. **To
_communicate_ something means to successfully transfer the information into
another person's brain.** It isn't just the sending, it's confirmation of the
receipt.

What if you send a Slack message and the recipient doesn't notice it? What if
you publish a blog post and nobody reads it? Then you aren't actually
communicating. You're putting a message in a bottle and hoping someone
discovers it when it washes ashore.

![Is this communication?](/images/message-in-a-bottle.jpg)

Am I claiming that, when you share information, it is 100% your fault if your
audience doesn't absorb and remember it forever? No. Without a doubt, I have
allowed my mind to wander when I should have been paying attention far too many
times. I have also honestly _forgotten_ things that people have told me. We all
have. To the extent these cases represent failed communication, the fault was
mostly or entirely mine. But they were still communication failures.

What I'm saying is that **communication is an outcome, not an action**.
Communication is not saying things, or writing things, or sharing things. _How_
you communicate something is an implementation detail; what matters is whether
it actually lands, and sticks, in the mind(s) of your audience. Skilled
communicators are those who can reliably transmit information accurately all
the way into other people's heads.

So how do you know if you have communicated effectively?

1. **Good**: At a bare minimum, you need a response. Not from a robot---a blue
   checkmark or some analytics data doesn't count[^robot-response]---a response
   from the person. That said, not all responses are created equal.
2. **Better**: Ideally the response includes an attempt to understand. An email
   that just reads "Thank you" doesn't tell you the recipient even bothered
   reading what you wrote. On the other hand, "Thanks for writing this, you
   make some great points" tells you they read it; however, there is still a
   chance they missed what you were really trying to say.
3. **Best**: The strongest confirmation you can get is when your audience is
   able to demonstrate understanding. This could be as simple as "Got it---I'll
   make X my top priority" where X is something you've requested from a
   colleague. It doesn't have to be an agreement, though; it could be someone
   engaging with your points and even disagreeing with you, as long as they are
   able to accurately represent your position.

Now, what if you _haven't_ communicated effectively? What if no one reads your
email? Or replies to your Slack message? Or what if the responses you get make
you suspect you didn't clearly get your message across?

Not to worry. Do the same thing you always do when at first you don't succeed:
try, try again. If you didn't get a response, try a gentle reminder. If you got
a generic response, ask for validation. (Sometimes I try: "Could you put that
in your own words just to make sure we're on the same page?") And finally, if
you got a response that implies misunderstanding, treat it as a challenge! Your
new mission: to reach a shared understanding with this person. The next step
could be a follow-up email providing more background context, or a drawing or
diagram to help visualize the ideas, or a list of questions to better
understand their perspective. For me, it's often as simple as a 30-minute video
chat.

Just remember that communication is an outcome. The work isn't done when you
hit send.

[^robot-response]: Think for a moment about what these signals actually mean: that a computer sent a message to another computer. E.g. a client application established a connection to a server application, _theoretically_ as the result of a human action---but maybe not. And even if it was, the person might have clicked on a link accidentally; or they opened a window and then immediately got distracted and forgot about it; or their child was playing with their phone; or their cat was walking on their keyboard.
