---
title: Communication requires information to be received
date: 2021-09-08
published: false
---

This is something I've observed countless times in both my personal and
professional life.

Too often, I will hear someone say, "I sent you a Slack message about this
yesterday." Or: "I sent you an email last week." Or: "I brought this up in a
meeting last month." The context is that I don't know something, and the person
I'm talking to is frustrated I don't know it because---in their mind---they
already communicated it to me.

It's the same phenomenon when a team member says, "I wrote a blog post about
this." Or: "I shared a page with the team." Or: "I gave a demo of this."

The fallacy is a misunderstanding of good communication. To _communicate_
something means to successfully transfer the information into another person's
brain. It isn't just the sending, it's confirmation of the receipt.

What if you send a Slack message and the recipient doesn't notice it? What if
you publish a blog post and no one reads it? Then you aren't actually
communicating. You're putting a message in a bottle and hoping someone
discovers it when it washes ashore.

![Is this communicatiion?](/images/message-in-a-bottle.jpg)

Am I claiming that, when you share information, it is 100% your fault if your
audience doesn't absorb and remember it forever? No. Without a doubt, I have
allowed my mind to wander when I should have been paying attention far too many
times. I have also honestly _forgotten_ things that people have told me. We all
have. To the extent these cases represent communication failures, the fault was
mostly or entirely mine. But they were still communication failures.

What I'm saying is that **communication is a skill**, and skilled communicators
are effective at transmitting information all the way into other people's
minds, and validating that it has reached its destination.

So this common assumption---I _sent_ information, therefore it must have been
received---is, to me, a sign of misunderstanding what communication really is.
