---
title: What causes burnout?
date: 2021-02-15
published: false
---

I've been thinking about burnout.

It's a topic that comes up often, and the question is almost always the same:
*How do we respond to it?* Likewise, the proposed answers tend to fall into a
few predictable categories: gifts, games or other social activities, and
encouraging team members to take time off from work.

There's something about these conversations that never sits quite right with
me, and I think I know what it is.

First, I should clarify something. All of these proposed answers for addressing
burnout are good things. I like giving gifts! I like social activities! I like
for people to take time off from work! **I don't believe these are effective
tools against burnout.**

Something most of us don't spend enough time thinking about is what _causes_
burnout. We tend to take it for granted that if people are working "too much"
and not getting enough breaks, burnout is inevitable. And I'm sure there is
some truth to this. But the way I think of burnout highlights some key
variables in this formula that I believe we should be focusing on more.

# Running on empty

To do work, we all need fuel. Call it motivation, energy, bandwidth, whatever
you want; but there is _something_ intangible that we need to get things done,
and it is a finite resource. Some activities consume this resource, while
others replenish it. Most of us can tell when we're running dangerously low on
this fuel. *Burnout* is the feeling you get when you've run out. You can't do
any more work until you refuel.

I like this way of thinking about burnout because it brings two very specific
questions into focus:

1. What is our rate of burning fuel?
2. What's the most effective way to refuel?

This brings me to those ideas for responding to burnout. What doesn't sit right
with me about them is that they do nothing to address the rate at which fuel is
being burned. And in my experience, most of the time, _if we're talking about
burnout_, this is the real issue.

It would be as if you were driving in your car from New York to Los Angeles,
and you found you were running out of gas every 50 miles, and your response to
that was _We need to make sure to take a route where there's a gas station
every 50 miles._ No! You need to check your gas tank, because there's obviously
a leak.
