---
title: What you need to hear
date: 2023-07-29
published: false
---

A few years ago I wrote a piece called [Advice vs. guidelines][1] because I
wanted to distinguish between times when I'm just trying to be _helpful_ to
someone given the state of the world, versus other times when I have an opinon
about what the state of the world "should" be.

There is another distinction I often find myself making, which is not about the
world as a whole but rather who we are in the world---i.e., who _I_ am, and who
my audience is, whether the reader I have in mind for a piece of writing, the
viewer for a video (I often record videos to share with my teams at work), or
simply the person I'm speaking with in reality. The myth of the "general
audience" is that a piece of communication may be suitable for everyone; but I
find this is rarely the case. Even when I _think_ what I'm saying is general,
inevitably someone has a reaction to what I say that surprises me and shows me
that what I have to say isn't as universal as I thought.

In truth, I am skeptical that there is any form of advice that would valuable to
all people. We all come from different backgrounds, face different challenges,
and are the result of a unique combination of countless variables that
collectively made us who and what we are. This is an imperfect analogy, but it
is a bit like every human has an internal set of metaphorical locks, and advice
is a key. Many keys are useful to many of us. Some keys are only useful to a
few. No key is useful to everyone.

For example, in my career, I have advised many individuals with something along
the lines of "Ask for forgiveness, not permission"---a well-known adage, but
certainly not the message I believe _everyone_ needs to hear. Some people are
bullies, or reckless, or have very poor judgment. A lot of these folks probably
need to hear the opposite advice. But there are a lot of smart, capable people
who know what the right thing to do is, but their deference to authority or
their reliance on achieving consensus get in the way of making progress. These
are the people who, in my opinion, often need to hear this advice.

Sometimes, what you need to hear is "Believe in yourself; you can do this!" But
not everyone has a confidence problem. Some people have an _arrogance_ problem.
These people might need to hear "Stop blaming others and take a good long look
in the mirror."

Sometimes, what you need to hear is "A penny saved is a penny earned". But not
everyone is too short-sighted to plan for the future. Some people have a bigger
problem living in the moment and enjoying life. These people might need to hear
"Live today like it's your last."

Sometimes, what you need to hear is "The squeaky wheel gets the grease". But not
everyone has a hard time speaking up, voicing their problems, seeking attention
or asking for help. Some people are constantly complaining or declaring that the
sky is falling. These people might need to hear the story of the boy who cried
wolf.

I have to remind myself of this sometimes, not only when I give someone else
advise but also when I hear advice that doesn't resonate for me. My knee-jerk
reaction is often _That sounds completely wrong_. But then I realize: maybe it
just isn't what _I_ need to hear." It could be exactly what someone else (most
likely the intended audience) needs to hear.

Let others hear what they need to hear, and keep your ears open for the wisdom
that's meant for you.

[1]: /posts/advice-vs-guidelines.html
