---
title: The desire to appear strong is a weakness
date: 2014-12-02
published: false
---

A military general stands above the battlefield, his trusted advisor by his side.

"Have our soldiers assemble here," says the general, motioning to an open area
near camp. "I want the enemy to see our numbers."

"Why is that, sir?" his advisor asks.

"To instill fear!" says the general.

The advisor hesitates. After some time, he says, "I question whether that is
wise. Those enemies who would fear us based on such a display are surely weak,
and so we would defeat them regardless. On the other hand, a more worthy enemy
would not be frightened by our numbers, but would rather use knowledge of our
size to better prepare for the fight. In either case we have nothing to gain,
strategically."

Taken aback, the general considers his advisor's words for a moment. "You're
quite right," he says at last. "Never mind, then."

Later, the battle is raging, and the general's troops are winning. In the
distance, the enemy has raised flags with satirical images taunting the
general's homeland. One of them catches the general's eye.

"Send a special team to take down those flags," he says to his advisor.

"Why would we do that?" his advisor asks.

"We cannot let them taunt us like that! They are laughing at us."

Again, the advisor takes a moment to respond. "It seems to me that would be
shortsighted," he says eventually. "We are winning the battle at present. It
stands to reason if we continue with our current strategy, we will be
victorious. On the other hand, if we deviate by redirecting some of our men to
deal with those flags, it may turn the tide. Indeed, for us to change what we're
doing is probably exactly what the enemy wants! I propose we ignore the flags
rather than allow our enemies to influence our behavior simply by insulting us."

The general shakes his head. "Perhaps you have a point," he concedes, "but I
simply cannot allow this to stand. Do as I ordered."

The advisor nods solemnly, then leaves to execute the general's commands.

Some time passes, and the battle begins to turn. The general's forces are at a
disadvantage now, struggling to hold off the enemy.

"Sir!" the advisor cries, waving a scrap of paper. "I've just received word that
our allies have troops stationed nearby who can assist us!"

The general stares straight ahead, his face grim. "No," he says. "If we ask for
help we will appear weak. We must win this battle ourselves or not at all."


