---
title: Pride can be a weakness
date: 2017-02-04
published: false
---

I remember one day in college, a friend came into the commons area of the dorm
where I lived and asked me and some other friends if his purple velour shirt
made him seem less masculine. A couple of guys gave him a hard time, making fun
of him for wearing such a shirt. I don't think they actually cared about his
shirt; it was more the asking, and the insecurity that suggested, that they were
teasing him about.

We often think of *pride* as a good thing. It certainly has its benefits. The
notion of having pride in one's work leads many people to do better than they
would if they didn't care. But my mother always said, "Pride cometh before a
fall." Even as we celebrate pride, in the backs of our minds we know that it can
be a weakness too.

To clarify: by "pride" I am referring to the psychological need to be
recognized. I believe it is an overloaded term, so I know that when we speak of
pride that isn't necessarily what we're always talking about. But this is what
was on display when my college friend gave away his desire to be seen as
masculine. More generally it is the driving force behind many behaviors that I
feel are ultimately self-defeating.

In negotiating terms, pride presents a huge opportunity to a shrewd adversary.
In a negotiation, perfectly rational actors seek to make some form of exchange
where each side gets something they want. In an adversarial scenario, each side
aims to *get* more than they *give*, potentially by misleading the other side or
by leveraging some bargaining advantage. If one side is overly *proud*, it may
be possible to offer them something of little or no value, which strokes their
ego, in exchange for something of actual value.

Hypothetical example: suppose the kings of two warring kingdoms meet to
negotiate a truce. There is some disputed territory that both sides want, but
one is extremely proud and the other is simply cunning. The cunning king might
propose, "My armies will lay down their arms and surrender, declaring your side
to have won the war. In exchange we get the disputed territory, but you get to
declare victory."

This is an unlikely scenario--the proud king would have to be *really* dumb (or
*really* weak) to agree to such a deal--but it illustrates the point. In war
negotiations, declaring "victory" on its own means nothing. It may ostensibly
send a signal of strength, but in fact it is little more than peacock feathers.
And importantly, in the real world negotations are seldom so simple that it is
obvious who played whom[^who-played-whom]. The cunning kings of the real world
make sneak attacks through the soft belly of pride that may be difficult to
detect.

My point is to be very skeptical of those who spend a great deal of their time
and energy towards being *perceived* as strong. Real strength and the
declaration of strength are not the same thing. More often, they are opposites.

[^who-played-whom]: I admit that I am being cynical here. I actually do not subscribe to the idea that every negotiation is zero sum. Ideally, in many cases, negotations benefit both sides and it is not productive to scrutinize their asymmetry too closely. Nonetheless, I think it would be naive to suppose that people aren't taking advantage of one another on a pretty regular basis.
