---
title: Publish in under an hour
date: 2018-08-08
published: false
---

I realized something recently: I share my ideas with people every day in 1-1
conversations; but the rate at which I share my thoughts in written form is
_much_ slower. Probably 100x slower. That's not an exaggeration: in the past few
years my rate of publishing posts on this blog is less than 2 per year.
Meanwhile I have multiple conversations, both at work and outside of work, every
day.

You've probably heard the expression "The enemy is the perfect of the good." A
big part of the reason for the discrepancy between the value I provide in 1-1
interactions[^value-i-provide] vs. written communication is the amount of
scrutiny I apply to the things I write versus the things I say in personal
interactions. Meanwhile, the value of the information I share in written form is
nowhere *near* 100x as valuable.

I suspect the phenomenon of diminishing returns kicks in very quickly for me
with written communication. Most of the value is captured in the first 50% of
time invested; the remaining 50% of time invested only improves the final result
by, say, 10 to 20%. This is what that looks like over time:

![Impact over time depending on level of perfectionism](/images/perfectionism-over-time.png)

Over the course of my life, my hypothesis is that I would have a bigger impact
by polishing less and delivering more. If you're reading this and you're a
perfectionist, or even just _kind of_ a perfectionist (which is how I would
describe myself), this probably resonates with you. (We all already know this
about ourselves. Part of the curse of perfectionism: we are too aware of our own
shortcomings.)

Therefore, I'm trying a new thing. Starting once a week, I'm going to set aside
one hour of uninterrupted time[^uninterrupted-time] to start, finish, and
publish something. At the end of the hour it's pencils down: I'll publish it, no
matter what state it's in.

I am not imagining that this will _replace_ me sometimes choosing to spend more
time crafting something more thoughtful. In some cases the thing I publish in an
hour will hopefully serve as a precursor to something more substantial to come
along later. But at the very least, this should help me make a bit of a dent in
the mental backlog I have of all the ideas I want to write about.

Apologies in advance for the subpar material this will inevitably produce.

[^value-i-provide]: I mean, I _think_ I provide value. Maybe I don't, but if that's the case then I'm delusional, and I'm not worried about solving for that problem just yet.

[^uninterrupted-time]: Side note: this should really not be as rare as it is---something else for me to work on.