---
title: The self-healing chain
date: 2015-05-25
published: false
---

In school, we learned about series and parallel circuits. In a series or "daisy chain" circuit, the
same electrical current flows through each component (say, a light bulb) in *series*, such that a
single failed component brings down the whole chain. A parallel circuit, on the other hand, isn't
really a single circuit; it's *many* circuits, all wired up in parallel so that one component can
fail without affecting all the others.

Series circuits have some serious problems:

1. They're **fragile**: all it takes is one failed component to break everything. Moreover, the
   bigger the circuit (i.e. the more components it has), the worse this effect is. The odds of any
   one bulb failing are much greater when you've got 100 bulbs vs. just a few.
2. Once they *do* break, they're **difficult to fix**. I'm young enough that I don't remember ever
   having to deal with the horrors of series circuits; but I've heard harrowing tales of my parents'
   generation dealing with strings of Christmas lights that went out, having to check potentially
   hundreds of bulbs one by one in order to find the culprit.
3. A broken circuit **cannot be extended**. Once it's broken, adding any number of *perfectly good*
   components has no effect: it's still broken, and those components won't work until the root
   problem is resolved.

So series circuits are fragile, and they're tough to fix, but you *have* to fix them before you can
add more components to them. Parallel circuits, in contrast, suffer from none of these problems.

You might think I'm on my way to drawing an analogy between circuits and software systems. That
would probably be apt, but my point in discussing circuits isn't related to software specifically.
It's related to organizations of people.

We've all experienced the frustration of not being able to do *our* job because someone else hasn't
done *their* job. A software developer might like to implement a feature, but she can't because the
product owner hasn't spec'd it out, or the design is up in the air. A salesperson might have
established relationships with some great potential clients, but the engineering team has fallen
behind on delivering the product he's supposed to sell. And so on.

We have dependencies on other people. When those dependencies break down, it prevents us from doing
our jobs effectively. Hence, organizations are like series circuits: when one bulb burns out, the
other bulbs can't produce light.

And a big part of the problem is that we've all been trained to say: *That's not my job.*

Saying "That's not my job" is basically saying, "I'm okay with this circuit being broken." In an
organization full of smart, competent, motivated people who do their jobs well, all it takes is one
person who *doesn't* do their job well to neutralize an entire project. When that person fails (or
refuses) to do his job, the people depending on his work can't do theirs. As a result, those
further down the line can't do *their* jobs either. And on and on.

It can be difficult to identify the source of the problem in these situations. In a broken circuit,
from a single bulb's perspective, the problem is that it's getting no current from the bulb before
it. So it's *that* bulb's fault. But that bulb may not be getting any current from the *previous*
bulb. From each bulb's perspective, it's the bulb one step earlier in the circuit that's to blame.

In the same way, we often can't easily tell the difference between someone who *won't* do their job
and someone who *can't*. The outcome is the same either way. Both just look like bulbs that produce
no light.

Lastly, when a project is running behind schedule, there is often a temptation from the top to add
people. But adding people---even competent, highly motivated people---won't necessarily do anything
in this scenario, any more than adding perfectly good bulbs will have an impact on a broken series
circuit. The bad bulbs need to be fixed first.

So organizations suffer from all the same problems as series circuits. What can we do to overcome
them?

Imagine a new kind of light bulb that could reach out to nearby bulbs and repair them. The result
would be a circuit that's resilient in the face of failing bulbs, a self-healing chain.

Our organizations could be like this if, instead of saying "That's not my job" when things go wrong,
people reached out to assist those whose work they depend on. The potential difference this makes is
huge. It's the difference between a string of lights that's completely dead and one where every bulb
is lit.

Yes, it's risky. We worry that by going outside the parameters of our own jobs, we'll end up doing
someone else's job for them, setting a bad precedent. In the worst case, it could become expected:
we've created work for ourselves.

But consider the alternative. A world where every smart, capable person refuses to do work that's
not strictly part of their job description is a world where a lot of smart, capable people aren't
getting anything done.

For many of us, "That's not my job" is another way of saying, "It's not my fault." And that may be
true. But I think it would be healthy for us to reverse our perspective on the issue: it may not be
my *fault*, but does it *affect* me, and is it something I'm in any position to help *fix*?

This is the difference between a struggling project where everyone's trying to avoid being blamed
for its failure, and one where everyone's actively trying to fix it. Which do you think has a
greater chance of success?

When we stop saying "That's not my job" and start focusing on how we can fix the problems our
projects face---and stop caring about whose *fault* they are, or who "should" be fixing them---our
organizations become self-healing chains.
