---
title: When the golden rule goes wrong
date: 2018-07-17
published: false
---

One of my friends from Philadelphia[^philadelphia] once told me about a time
he went on a trip with mostly guys he didn't know (I think it was for a
bachelor party or something). Most members of the group were from the midwest
or maybe the south[^maybe-the-south]. At first everything was fine, but as the
trip went on, he started to feel uneasy. Eventually he realized that it was
making him uncomfortable how *nice* everyone was being to each other.

For my friend and his regular social group, normal behavior is just constantly
tearing each other to pieces. You make fun of each other, mock everything your
friend says or does, at every opportunity. I'm sure this sounds incredibly
unpleasant to many people, but for my friend and his group it's what puts
everyone at ease. No one is exempt, but no one is singled out.

This is why my friend wasn't comfortable in this new group of polite
strangers. He was suspicious of their kindness and kept bracing for the
sarcasm. He had trouble letting his guard down.

At Atlassian there is a company culture of giving "kudos", which is a material
way of recognizing a coworker for going above and beyond by giving them a gift
card or donating to a charity on their behalf. It's a way to reinforce
positivity throughout the company, by empowering employees to reward each
other's hard work.

Now here's my problem: I completely relate to the way my friend felt on that
trip. When someone gives me a compliment, my natural knee-jerk reaction is to
deflect it somehow. I may consciously understand that the compliment is
sincere, but I still unconsciously brace for sarcasm. This is especially true
in situations where I don't personally feel what I did was anything noteworthy
or special.

So for *me*, the idea of receiving a kudos actually makes me a little
uncomfortable, just as my friend was uncomfortable in a group of friends being
nice to each other. Those who have given me compliments over the years may
have noticed this as I often respond sarcastically, e.g. "Yeah, I'm pretty
much a hero."

We're all familiar with the so-called Golden Rule: treat others the way *you*
would want to be treated.

This rule makes a ton of sense. But as a manager, and as someone with a
proclivity for being cynical, it poses a problem. One of the biggest ways that
I have let my team down over the past few years is by not making enough of a
point to recognize great work as often as I should. This applies to giving
kudos[^doing-your-job], but it manifests in a hundred other little missed
opportunities as well, from writing more to praising team members more publicly
for good work to simply saying, "Hey, great job."

On reflection, I've realized that I have unconsciously projected my own
discomfort with receiving praise onto my team in an unfortunate distortion of
the golden rule. Because *I* feel awkward with praise, I have been stingy in
giving out praise to others. This has certainly not been deliberate -- I have
always had the _intention_ of providing lots of positive feedback -- but that
hasn't made it any less true.

I call this a distortion of the golden rule because, at the risk of stating the
obvious, the golden rule isn't about saddling others with your own weird
hangups. Having spent some time recently thinking more about this, I've come to
understand two things that I never really thought about before. First, if I'm
honest with myself, I _do_ want to receive praise for the same reason everyone
does: I want to know when I'm meeting others' expectations. Second, especially
for managers, the "you" in the golden rule should be your *aspirational* self.

The truth is that we all want positive feedback in some form, whether it's
verbal praise, a solid performance review or an [audible clicking sound][1]. I
may feel _uncomfortable_ with it, but I still want and even need it. The same
is true for things that are difficult: I want to be challenged, even though
tackling challenges is hard and I may not like that in the moment. But these
are two sides of the same coin. And the spirit of the golden rule is not "Treat
others the way you would feel least uncomfortable with"; it's about putting
yourself in the other person's shoes and trying to understand what their needs
are.

Which brings me to the second point about what "you" means in the golden rule.
The idea that there are multiple personae in our minds is not new: Freud
distinguished between the id and the ego, for example, while MacLean proposed
the so-called reptilian complex as opposed to the limbic system. I can want to
lose weight, yet at the same time I may want to eat a donut. The innovation of
these theories positing multiple aspects of the self is that we can think of
these competing desires as represents different versions of *me*.

[^philadelphia]: This may seem like an irrelevant detail, but I don't think it is. This is the town where football fans [booed and threw snowballs at Santa Claus][2]. It really shouldn't be called the City of Brotherly Love.

[^maybe-the-south]: It doesn't really matter. They just definitely *weren't* from Philadelphia.

[^doing-your-job]: I even sometimes joke with one of the other team leads on Bitbucket about giving out "Doing your job" stickers instead of kudos. We should probably stop making that joke.

[1]: https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/positive-reinforcement-helps-surgeons-learn/
[2]: https://www.snopes.com/fact-check/philadelphia-fans-boo-santa-claus/
