My last course as a grad student at CMU was *Entrepreneurship for Software Engineers*, in which teams of students basically worked on startup ideas for one semester, sharing their progress and collecting feedback during each class session and presenting to a small group of VC reps at the end of the term. I worked on a silly little app called [InstaPie](http://www.instapie.net)--which I haven't touched in months (mainly because I don't have an Apple computer anymore!), though I *do* plan to pick it back up soon, I swear--and I remember during my presentation to the VCs, one of them asked, "What problem are you trying to solve here?"

This wasn't my first exposure to this question, of course. We'd been taught to always keep this question in our crosshairs, to not lose sight of the goal. Identifying the problem and proposing a solution is an important part of any elevator pitch, I hear. If you can't answer that question, then you've lost your way somehow. Start retracing your steps until you get back to the place where a problem is clear and what you're working on actually solves it.

It makes sense; I won't debate that. Nonetheless, I think this mentality is too fixed in our brains. We have **problem obsession**: always needing to fix something, solve something. Take something *problematic* and address that, rather than just pursuing an idea for its own sake.

Another way of saying this is that I think *solving a problem* is *one* thing that's good to focus on, but it isn't the *only* thing worth focusing on.

I'm reminded of this whenever I hear people discussing things like space exploration or research into seemingly sci-fi notions like wormholes, or time travel, or [cloning a woolly mammoth](http://www.npr.org/blogs/thetwo-way/2013/05/31/187581614/report-of-liquid-woolly-mammoth-blood-prompts-clone-talk). There's a very practical attitude some people have about this, which is: until we've solved all of our problems *here on Earth*, we should put those other things on hold. They're not worth the resources, taxpayer money, etc. I don't have a strong opinion about that, to be honest (the taxpayer money part--if private enterprise is the way forward for space travel, I won't complain); but I do feel these things are important. Almost *more* important, in a way, than solving our problems.

Before you dismiss me as speaking nonsense, let me propose two possibilities.

First, let's say that one day, hundreds or thousands of years in the future, we've solved all of our problems. No more hunger, sickness, hatred, any of that stuff. The whole human race is living prosperously and peacefully. Then what? Do we have nothing to do anymore? Of course not: hopefully, in a world like that, we'd all be artists and scientists: creating and discovering things, just because.

That's not very realistic, if you ask me; so here's the second possibility. We *never* solve all of our problems. That is, there will always be something "wrong" that needs to be addressed. When then? Are we going to perpetually work on solving problems when the work will never be done? Well, *yes*, actually; but is that *all we're going to do*, to the exclusion of all other things? Seems a bit like [Sisyphus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sisyphus), doesn't it?

In either of these scenarios, I think we're better off not diverting 100% of our attention to the mere solving of problems. It would not be a very gratifying existence. In the first case it ends up that we're just getting the rough part out of the way, setting up some distant future generation for a truly good life. As noble as that may sound, it still undermines the *inherent* value of solving problems as more than just a means to an end. And in the second case we're doing essentially devoting our entire existence to maintenance: perpetually chipping away at an issue that's never going away.

But when I said the crazy out-there theoretical is *more* important, I didn't just mean because it's interesting and "What's the point of all this if it isn't interesting?" (though I do feel that way as well). Ask any theoretical scientist what the *point* is of what they're doing and they're likely to say something about how sometimes you can't predict what future progress will stem from a theoretical discovery. That's true. It's another way of saying: we don't *know* what all of our problems are. (Look at tobacco. Or carbon emissions.) I'd say as a species we're still at [unconscious incompetence](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Four_stages_of_competence): blissfully unaware of all the things we don't even know we don't know.

Of course, I'm not saying that we should forget about solving real problems and turn all of our attention to the great unknown. That would be chaos. Nor am I saying that the alternative to "problem obsession" is strictly about theoretical discovery (uh... didn't I start this off by talking about a silly app?). Really it comes back to my earlier point about solving problems not being the *only* thing we should work on. Problems are important, and we need people in this world to be working on them. But not *every* person. Maybe we can even spare a few on "It's hard to get a taxi in San Francisco!" and "We're going to turn the restaurant reservation system on its head!" And perhaps we could allocate one or two more to things that are intriguing, or beautiful, or just plain cool.
